export const meta = {
  title: "The FPL Cartel - separating fact from fiction",
  date: "2024-09",
  shitpost: true,
  draft: true,
}

# The FPL Cartel - separating fact from fiction

Yet again there seems to be controversy about the supposed 'secret inner circle'
of FPL managers, who uniformly sold Saka before today's absence.

As someone who sold Saka - but who has nothing to hide - I would like to offer
my thought process behind this move. To explain fully, it makes sense actually
to go back to January this year, when my perspective on FPL changed somewhat.

As you may know, I am interested in FPL Optimisation - learning how we can apply
mathematical techniques to the decision-making process is fascinating to me. I
was up late one night experimenting with new methods relating to stochastic
programming - a branch of optimisation relating to making decisions under
uncertain conditions. As you can imagine, this method is especially relevant for
planning around injuries of unknown status.

I was toiling all night with these ideas, rewriting my code and rerunning my
scripts, until, finally - I made a great breakthrough. For the first time I
built a really complete generalisable model for injuries in FPL. I peeked out of
my window, and I saw the night sky beginning to lighten. In no mood to sleep and
with work in just a few hours time, I decided to go out for a walk.

And so it was that in the crisp winter predawn, I found myself meandering
through fog on the almost-deserted streets of London. A short loop around the
block would do, then maybe I would be in the mood to sleep again. I put on an
FPL podcast, I can't remember which.

Suddenly, piercing the barrier of my noise-cancelling earphones, I hear a
noise - it must be the screech of a baby. Probably waking up; maybe the hour was
later than I thought. It was winter, after all.

I walk past the church of St-Barts-the-Great in Smithfield - one of the city's
oldest churches, it cut an impressive but almost menacing figure against the
brightening sky. I ponder about the generations of Londoners before me who must
have looked up at that church at this time of morning at this time of year.

With my eyes off the ground, I slip and tumble! I fell, fell further, fell below
the ground even. I must have walked over an opening to a cellar! I rub my blurry
eyes, and it appears I'm in some kind of dark tunnel. My headphones had flew
form my head, god knows to where. I can see the opening I fell through - it's
just out of reach. I resolve that I must find another way out. I spy an orange
glow in the distance!

I stumble forwards, barely able to see my own feet. It must surely be a way out,
or at least up into the church.

But then I hear it again.

The baby crying. Louder and louder now, more volume with every step. What on
earth is going on?

I can see now that the end is occupied by a chamber, lit dimly by candles
hanging from its walls and ceiling. A baby lies on the stone alter at the room's
centre, surrounded by a circle of 15-20 dark hooded figures, some holding
strange old books and others gripping candles in pale hands. Now I'm closer, I
can hear that they are chanting under their breath.

“Rege Satanas, Ave Satanas, Manifestamus iniuriam Kyle Walker”

“Rege Satanas, Ave Satanas, Manifestamus iniuriam Kyle Walker”

“Rege Satanas, Ave Satanas, Manifestamus iniuriam Kyle Walker”

I gasp. It is then that I am hit by a sharp blow to the back of the head. The
last thing I remember are those words ringing in my ears, and the baby crying.
“Manifestamus iniuriam Kyle Walker”

When I awake, I am lying on a cold stone tablet. An old man stands next to me,
cloaked but not hooded. His face is wrinkled, shrivelled even. He has a black
emptiness behind his eyes, and his skin is grey.

“Who are you? What did you do to that baby??” I demand.

He is silent for a second. “Never mind that” he responds. “Do you still have
Kyle Walker in your FPL team?”

I am stunned by the question “…yes, I think so. He seems like a good asset for
this run of fixtures.”

“Sell him, or bench him”. His icy voice sends shivers through me.
