export const meta = {
  title: "Stochastic Programming in FPL - a Technical and Non-Technical Review",
  date: "2023-09",
  shitpost: false,
  draft: true,
}

# Stochastic Programming in FPL - a Technical and Non-Technical Review

I'm ashamed to say that the application of stochastic programming to FPL might
be the best idea I'll ever have. Like most good ideas, it came to me in the
shower - I stepped out, dried myself off, cursed myself for not thinking of it
about a year earlier, then discussed the idea with
[Sertalp Çay](https://twitter.com/sertalpbilal) (who requires no introduction,
since his online following is a superset of my own).

We traded diagrams mapping the idea, and inside 2 hours Sertalp had written a
comprehensive implementation of the algorithm - it took me another 3 to catch
up.

<div className="flex items-center justify-center gap-5 py-[1em]">
  <div>
    <Image
      className="object-cover object-top dark:invert"
      alt="An early stochastic programming diagram"
      src="/images/stochastic-programming-diagram-2.webp"
      height={217}
      width={163}
    />
  </div>
  <div>
    <Image
      className="object-cover object-top dark:invert"
      alt="An early stochastic programming diagram"
      src="/images/stochastic-programming-diagram-1.webp"
      height={217}
      width={400}
    />
  </div>
</div>

Stepping back from the particulars and running a few solves, it became evident
to me that we'd taken the biggest step forward in our ability to model the FPL
decision process in years. It felt like this was the "right" way to tackle the
problems that we'd spent almost all of our effort in FPL optimisation struggling
to solve (see: free transfer penalty, price point incentive, sensitivity
analysis, etc).

Here we are, a year and a half later, and FPL stochastic programming has changed
the world! Just kidding - it's not caught on in the analytics community in any
capacity. As far as I know - and I'd be _thrilled_ to be proven wrong - the
number of people who have bothered to write an implementation of stochastic
programming for FPL is stuck at 2.

I think one of the reasons for its relative non-adoption (compared to inferior
methods of ensuring flexibility, like sensitivity analysis) is a communication
problem. Sertalp has
[hours of Youtube content](https://www.youtube.com/@AlpsCode) explaining other
concepts and giving detailed implementation tutorials, which I think most FPL
linear solvers enthusiasts have relied on, but I have done nothing in explaining
the concept of stochastic programming in FPL beyond an initial Twitter thread.

This post is an attempt to put this right, and provide fragments of
understanding which may previously have been inaccessible. This post assumes the
reader has some understanding of FPL analytics, and especially EV in the context
of FPL - if you haven't yet had the pleasure, I recommend
[this introduction](https://alpscode.com/blog/intro-to-fpl-analytics/).

## An explanation ...for anyone interested

### Some background

In this post, I am going to be talking about **EV**, and **not FPL points**.
This is because I have lost touch with reality, and I spend my days in an
ethereal, theoretical ocean realm from whence grass cannot be touched.

However, I will convince you that this manner of thinking makes sense in a
_"real world"_ too. Let's say, hypothetically, my goal in FPL was to have
control over my distribution of points outcomes; I might, for example, try to
maximise the mean average number of points I am expected to score.[^1]

If I wanted, I could cleanly split the task of maximising points into two
distinct problems to be approached independently:

1. Accurately projecting the value of assets
1. Selecting assets to maximise their combined projected value

To make this division, rather than trying to frame the problem of controlling
points outcomes some other way, is the essence of the philosophy of EV in FPL.
It is not the _only_ way to think about the game, but it is a pragmatic and
internally consistent system.

Let's say we are more interested in step 2 than step 1, which means we are
interested in fine-tuning our process _conditional_ on existing projections.
Then the nature of the projections themselves - and, as such, any connection to
actual value as opposed to expected value - can be marginalised from the
equation.

Before we go on, it's probably worth describing what an FPL solver actually
does, and how it does it.

There is a common belief that the ultimate purpose of an FPL solver is to
generate a plan, or even a set of plans; I think this should be considered a
misconception, albeit a very easy one to slip into. I think that the purpose of
an FPL solver is instead to generate _a decision_. The output we care about is
the set of actions to be performed before the next deadline - this is a lineup
order, a captain, a vice-captain, a set of moves, and a chip to be played (or no
chip at all). This "decision" is more accurately a combination of many, many
decisions, but since all these decisions are very deeply interdependent I will
refer to the combination itself as "a decision". This decision will, in the case
of most solvers, reveal itself as subset of a plan, but not necessarily.

(Diagram of a function with an input being a set of FPL decisions)

A solver is composed of a model, and some mechanism for finding an optimal
solution for the model.

The model contains a set of constraints (e.g. a squad is limited to 15 players,
the captain and vice-captain must be different players, etc) and an objective
function - a function into which we can input decisions, and which will spit out
some value describing the decisions' quality. The maximum output that the
function can yield is called an "optimal solution", and the input (i.e.
decision) associated with this output is an "optimal decision". For example, the
most obvious objective function is an estimate of the EV we are likely to
accumulate over some period if we follow through with the input decision.

In the context of FPL solvers, we are much more interested in the input
corresponding to the optimal solution than the optimal solution itself; in the
example just given, the objective value has some meaning; however, in practice,
the objective is usually some heuristic with very little concrete meaning.

The mechanism for finding an optimal solution to the model could be one of many
algorithms, depending on the nature of the model. The models discussed in this
post (and likely almost every post on this site) are _linear_.

<Accordion type="single" collapsible>
  <AccordionItem value="item-1" className="border-none">
    <AccordionTrigger className="gap-2 py-0 pr-2 text-left font-normal text-[#374151] hover:no-underline">
      It's not necessary to understand linearity to grasp stochastic
      programming, but if you are genuinely curious, you can click here to find
      out more.
    </AccordionTrigger>
    <AccordionContent>
      <br />
      Think of your FPL decisions as variables: owning a player can be a variable
      with value 1, for example, and not owning them might have value 0. An optimal
      value of a decision variable is not known before the an optimal solution is
      found. To satisfy a linear model, your constraints and objective may contain
      decision variables multiplied by numbers, added to other decision variables
      multiplied by numbers, but nothing more. You cannot, for example, multiply
      a decision variable by a decision variable. This may seem very constraining;
      how on earth are you supposed to adequately describe a problem as complicated
      as FPL just by adding decisions?!. And it is! However, by keeping our models
      linear, we are able to solve them using some incredibly powerful machinery.[^2]
      Although our language for describing FPL is constrained, we can find optimal
      solutions for linear problems - and prove that they truly are optimal - with
      relative ease. Anyway, FPL is, for the most part, a linear game: your decisions
      (the players we own) are multiplied by numbers (how many points they score)
      and added together - although representing things linearly becomes a challenge
      once we try implementing transfer logic or autosubs, or once we try to model
      anything besides the total number of points scored.
    </AccordionContent>
  </AccordionItem>
</Accordion>

### The problem

Almost every alteration I make to my model has been motivated by my desire to
balance grabbing EV with maintaining the ability to react to change.

There are many ways to frame "the ability to react to change", but I think some
clarity can derived from splitting this the concept into two (potentially
overlapping) components:

- Understanding and accounting for the value of information (short-term
  flexibility)
- Ensuring paths are robust to change (long-term flexibility)

FPL solvers are greedy by default. The objective in FPL is to score as many
points as possible, and solvers pursue this objective with unrestrained
optimism.

They are also deterministic; strategies are developed by solvers under an
implicit assumption that EV in the future is set in stone - in fact, one of the
very few things that we can be certain of is that the EV of _every_ relevant
fantasy asset will change. Without modification, there exists no mechanism to
ensure future plans are robust to new information or unexpected events, nor does
there exist any way to make different plans for different future scenarios in a
consistent way.

(Visualisation of uncertain DGW dist'n of outcomes and mean EV)

To make solvers practical, we have to try to reign in this optimism and account
for the non-deterministic nature of the game.

### Past solutions (and their problems)

- A **Free Transfer Penalty** is a bone-headed but pragmatic way to make the
  solver less greedy. Effectively it says "If you hold off on making a move when
  there is one available, I'll give you $p$ extra points".

  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <p className="m-0 text-2xl cursor-default">👍</p>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <p className="m-0 text-2xl cursor-default">👎</p>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
  | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
  | The penalty provides an incentive to roll a single transfer in the current gameweek (for short-term flexibility), but the concept comes into its own when applied indiscriminately to future GWs - _even when 2 transfers are available_. Using the penalty in this way leads to plans which don't use all available transfers, i.e. which plan to burn transfers. These "skeleton plans" have only the essence of a plan booked in, and gaps elsewhere. Plans generated with this penalty are more robust to new information in the long-term than plans without, as associated plans are simpler and more pragmatic. | The penalty is a simple solution to an over-simplified version of the flexibility problem. It isn't enough to have gaps to fill in; often change will be so extreme that whole plans get thrown out the window. The free transfer penalty alone is unable to provide robustness for situations where extreme flexibility is required, except in suggesting not to plan ahead at all. _"What is the value of $p$"_, you might ask? _"About 1.5"_ I might answer, before refusing to elaborate. The truth is that a well-tuned penalty is dynamic, and there is no scientific way to calculate it at any given time. |

  All in all, the free transfer penalty is a handy trick for quick-and-dirty
  solves, but it does not provide a comprehensive solution.<br/><br/>

- **Sensitivity analysis** is a slightly more sophisticated attempt. Assets' EV
  can be liable to change in unexpected ways over time, due to
  increasing/decreasing minutes expectations for example, or perhaps changes to
  our estimates of players' underlying production rates. All these changes are
  realisations of an accumulation of information.[^3] In sensitivity analysis,
  we model this change and simulate many instances of information realisations.
  A solve is performed on each realisation, and the more common solutions are
  considered the more robust (Find out more
  [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qJh3hRcM_7g)).

  |                                                                                                                  <p className="m-0 text-2xl cursor-default">👍</p>                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <p className="m-0 text-2xl cursor-default">👎</p>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
  | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
  | By simulating scenarios, we can exploit any understanding we have of the distribution of unknown information. For example, suppose we know of a 50% likely double gameweek in 2 GWs time. We can run half of our information simulations with the double realised, and half without. | The nature of sensitivity analysis is more deterministic than it ought to be. Each generated scenario corresponds to a single realisation of information, and, from the perspective of a given point in time in a scenario, the future of the information realisation is known - this is to say each scenario is deterministic, and therefore an imperfect model of the FPL decision process. The aggregate of these imperfect models is another, more balanced, imperfect model. The nature of the aggregation itself is also problematic: the best insight we can extract from sensitivity analysis is _"Asset $A$ seems to appear in optimal plans ~$Y\%$ of the time"_. Is $A$ really an essential component of these plans? How much worse are optimal plans which exclude $A$? What if, when $A$ appears in optimal plans, it makes it barely, but when they exclude $A$ they do so comfortably? <p className="text-md m-0 inline-block">**WHAT THEN?**</p> Sensitivity analysis has no answer for such questions, because it describes modal outcomes rather than the expected outcome. Insights like "Asset $A$ works especially well with asset $B$" are possible to extract, but very tedious to do so. |

  As the loser who built the first model for sensitivity analysis in FPL, I feel
  qualified to say that it should have been the last.

### The new solution

## ...for practitioners

(Scenarios modelled vs. solve time graph)

(Typical primal/dual graph)

(Simplified python implementation)

(Link to github repo with full demo)

## ...for losers

(Mathematical analysis of stochastic programming)

[^1]:
    This is not the only objective one can have in FPL, and is far from the most
    interesting, as I hope to demonstrate in future posts. It is, however, the
    most obvious and therefore popular goal in the FPL analytics community and
    provides a relatively easy decision process to model.

[^2]:
    There are many options when it comes to open-source linear solvers, such as
    [COIN-OR CBC](https://github.com/coin-or/Cbc),
    [GLPK](https://www.gnu.org/software/glpk/), and
    [Google OR-Tools](https://github.com/google/or-tools). For those that who
    are able to get access (for example, all students and academic faculty),
    commercial solvers like [Gurobi](https://www.gurobi.com/) can provide
    significant performance improvements over open-source alternatives.

[^3]: Try saying that ten times fast.
