export const meta = {
  title: "The Last Man in Grass FC",
  date: "2023-08",
  shitpost: true,
}

# The Last Man in Grass FC

## Chapter 1

It was a clear and warm evening in August, and the clocks were striking eight.
Anthony Jones, his neck craned down on his phone to see the starting lineups,
slipped quickly into the apartments, though he knew he wouldn't be quick enough
to catch the moment of kick-off even with the 2-minute delay on his usual
stream.

The hallway smelt of stale beer. He looked down at his phone again, and the home
screen wallpaper stared back up at him. It depicted simply an enormous face,
taking up most of the background: the face of a man of about thirty-five, a
skinny, hairless face with mildly handsome features and a cheeky grin. **BIG SIG
IS WATCHING YOU**, the caption beneath it ran. Anthony opened Twitter, and
started scrolling through the timeline. He always scrolled through the timeline
on the seven flights of stairs to the flat.

<div className="flex w-full justify-center">
  <Image src="/images/big-sig.webp" alt="Big Sig" width={200} height={267} />
</div>

Inside the flat a dry voice was reading out the latest score - 0.4 to 0.1 in
Brentford's favour. The voice came from the television screen on the right-hand
wall. As always with the football broadcasts, there was no "picture"; the
endless feed of numbers fizzed through the screen, only taking meaning when the
voice read them out.

If Anthony strained, he swore could remember a time before it was like this. A
time from his childhood, maybe. He thought he remembered flashes of green, the
roar of a crowd, but he couldn't be sure. It had been a long time since football
had been played on grass, and all agreed the game was better this way. The game
was fairer this way. The game was purer this way. All the noise removed, only
the beauty remained. At least, that's what the timeline said.

Anthony went back to his phone, and opened up the timeline again. The voice
droned on in the background, but Anthony had lost interest in the game as soon
as Brentford surpassed the 1.0 mark and his beloved Luton Town sat at 0.1. The
tweets read:

<div className="flex w-full justify-center py-5">
  <div className="flex w-full flex-col gap-10 sm:w-4/5">
    <FakeTweet
      text="Luton Town are a disgrace to the game. They should be relegated."
      user="Big Sig"
      handle="BigSig"
      avatar="/images/big-sig.webp"
      likes={0}
      date="2023-08-01T20:00:00Z"
    />
    <FakeTweet
      text="Luton Town are a disgrace to the game. They should be relegated."
      user="Big Sig"
      handle="BigSig"
      avatar="/images/big-sig.webp"
      likes={0}
      date="2023-08-01T20:00:00Z"
    />
  </div>
</div>
