# The Last Man in Grass FC

## Chapter 1

It was a clear and warm evening in August, and the clocks were striking eight.
Anthony Jones, his neck craned down on his phone to see the starting lineups,
slipped quickly through his front door, though he knew he wouldn't be quick
enough to catch the moment of kick-off even with the 2-minute delay on his usual
stream.

The hallway smelt of stale beer. He looked down at his phone again, and the home
screen wallpaper stared back up at him. It depicted simply an enormous face,
taking up most of the background: the face of a man of about thirty-five, a
skinny, hairless face with mildly handsome features and a cheeky grin. Anthony
opened Twitter, and started scrolling the timeline, as he always did walking up
the seven flights of stairs to his flat. He reached the door and swiped home
again, and there face glared at him again. **BIG SIG IS WATCHING YOU**, the
caption beneath it ran.

<div className="flex w-full justify-center">
  <Image src="/images/big-sig.webp" alt="Big Sig" width={200} height={267} />
</div>

Inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of figures which had
something to do with the production of pig-iron. The voice came from an oblong
metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surface of the
right-hand wall. Winston turned a switch and the voice sank somewhat, though the
words were still distinguishable. The instrument (the telescreen, it was called)
could be dimmed, but there was no way of shutting it off completely. He moved
over to the window: a smallish, frail figure, the meagreness of his body merely
emphasized by the blue overalls which were the uniform of the party. His hair
was very fair, his face naturally sanguine, his skin roughened by coarse soap
and blunt razor blades and the cold of the winter that had just ended.

Outside, even through the shut window-pane, the world looked cold. Down in the
street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper into spirals, and
though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue, there seemed to be no
colour in anything, except the posters that were plastered everywhere. The
black-moustachio&aposd face gazed down from every commanding corner. There was
one on the house-front immediately opposite. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the
caption said, while the dark eyes looked deep into Winston&aposs own. Down at
street level another poster, torn at one corner, flapped fitfully in the wind,
alternately covering and uncovering the single word INGSOC. In the far distance
a helicopter skimmed down between the roofs, hovered for an instant like a
bluebottle, and darted away again with a curving flight. It was the police
patrol, snooping into people&aposs windows. The patrols did not matter, however.
Only the Thought Police mattered.
